it's now my great pleasure to introduce
Our Guest this evening uh Dr sidhart M
muckery uh Dr muckery won the 2011 piser
prize for non-fiction for the Emperor of
all maladies a meticulously researched
and panoramic history of humankind's
fight against cancer it was named to
numerous media Outlets best of year
lists and was adapted by Ken Burns into
a PBS documentary Dr muckery is also the
author of a number one New York's Times
bestseller the Gene and intimate
history after after completing Secondary
School in India uh he earned his
undergraduate degree in biology at
Stanford and then attended Oxford
University as a road scholar after which
he attended Harvard Medical School
currently Dr muckery is associate
professor of medicine at Columbia
University a cancer physician at the New
York Presbyterian Hospital
and a researcher whose laboratory
focuses on discovering new cancer drugs
his articles and commentary have been
published in such places as nature New
England Journal of Medicine the New York
Times the new Republic uh in his in in
his new book the song of the cell Dr
muckery tells the story of how
scientists discovered cells began to
understand them and now we're using that
knowledge to create new
humans uh filled with writing so vivid
lucid and suspenseful that complex
science becomes thrilling this the song
of the cell is laced with M Dr Muer's
own experience as a researcher a
physician and a prolific reader joining
Dr marcker G on stage tonight is a
Philadelphia Superstar Dr Carl Jun Dr
Jun is the Richard W vague professor of
Immunology excuse me of immunotherapy in
the department of pathology ology and
laboratory medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania Pearlman School of Music
music Pearlman school of medicine I was
going there pretty well but okay where
he where he is also uh the director of
the center for cellular
immunotherapies uh and um involved with
the Parker Institute for cancer
immunotherapy he is acclaimed for his
research in treatment of leukemia Dr
June pioneered car T therapy the first
FDA approved personalized cellular
therapy he's published more than 500
medical papers and has received numerous
Awards and honors I picked a few that I
thought were the among the most
interesting he has distinguished
graduate award from the US Naval Academy
he has the KO Medical Science prize from
Japan and the Breakthrough prize in life
sciences uh I know we're all eager to
hear what is sure to be an amazing
discussion so please join me in
welcoming uh sidart of muckery and Carl
Jun to the
stage hi well hello and welcome everyone
um it's really a great time to be here
you know with Philadelphia just getting
a Nobel
prize for the co vaccine so if you
missed that on to
[Music]
Monday so you know s I've been wonder
you know the main
you know your book you know the song of
the cell here is such an amazing story
and I hope you all read it because it
puts in a Layman's way how you can
understand for instance the mystery of
how all of us start with one cell but
how a kangaroo starts with one cell and
yet how are we so
different you know and it takes it
through that and then how can that lead
into cancer and other diseases so I
think it's it makes it and understanding
the history of how it happened because
there's so many improbable things that
said you know in you know and talks
about in that that I think um it just
makes it in a way that you just it's so
delicious to read so thanks for coming
down oh pleasure thank you Carl and I
have knowing each other you're even in
the book uh you you you have you have a
cameo
appearance yeah
so you know I think
you know understanding a cell and what
can go wrong is really important um I
wonder what you learned most while you
were doing that you know
overview so um what's interesting about
it is that um I think that there were um
sort of three very broad threads that
bring this book together um the first
thread um actually is the fact that we
know very we knew or I knew very little
about U this whole story um it's another
I think uh to some extent like my first
book and my second book um it's it's it
was sort of to even to me an untold
story um who found the first cell what
did they think about it how did they
figure that piece out um and what
happened what was the what were the
events or the series of events that led
to the the discovery and then
subsequently the realization that all of
us are made out of cells so um so there
was there's a there's a massive
historical piece um second um there was
a um scientific piece and the scientific
piece is uh how does all of this work um
how does a single cell develop into a
full-fledged organism um how does any of
this um manifest itself in nor normaly
and um what is the what is the nature
how are we built out of all of this um
that's an an amazing story and how do we
figure all of that out starting from the
interior anatomy of the cell the
structural anatomy of the cell to the
physiology of the cell um and then the
third piece which of course you're um
very much a part of and very much
involved in and Philadelphia is very
much a part of is um you know what
happens when things go abnormally um and
how to treat them um and um obviously uh
I wanted to congratulate you also on on
the Breakthrough prize but um that prize
is of course given because um it was no
fewer than I don't know a few miles from
here maybe less than a few miles from
here where um uh the first uh child with
leukemia was treated with te- cell
modified te- cell therapies um of course
uh under under your uh um vision and um
what's astonishing about it which you
know and I know but maybe the rest of
that this audience doesn't know was that
this young girl Emily Whitehead whose
picture you can um see here see here
I'll put it up in 2 seconds um was so uh
ill that she was basically given up for
dead the first picture in the pictures
um that's Emily um so so sick that she
was G given up for dead um brought here
in in in deep deep physiological
distress any I don't know many of you
have had The Misfortune or the or the
opportunity to see a a patient with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the sort
of the the deadliest stages of the
disease they are so sick um that it's um
it's almost as if everything fails all
at once it's a the the the whole system
is under collapse and that was true as
you very well note for Emily and and um
with the tea cells um and with the other
therapies that were appropriately given
and we can come back to that story in a
second um she came alive and um then
remained alive and is alive but the most
interesting piece of all of this is that
she is now a freshman freshw woman at
the University of
Pennsylvania um so um this human being
would not exist on the planet um and you
know revolutions begin one human being
medical revolutions begin one human
being at a time other revolutions also
began one human being at a time but uh
but it's that it's important to
recognize the role that that you and
others have played in this and really
congratulate um the whole ecosystem of
course and then and congratulate Emily
um on her and on her journey and maybe
she'll go on to cure um yet another
disease maybe maybe it's paying it
forward yeah it's it's been quite a
story with her
um and you know what's it because she
almost died I mean as sit said she was
really sick she had a fever of 106° for
three days after we treated her and I me
we had no idea why that was and um
through pure Serendipity we found out
that it was the car T cells attacking
her own bone marrow and the L IIA and
then fighting back that led to this
horrendous fever that wasn't caused by
an infection that that was a new finding
in medicine that you could actually
hyperactivate the immune system that way
and and we now learned that that's
that's actually a good sign it used to
be you know when you got really sick
like that that was bad but it now means
that that's a sign of response and you
know Sid and I grew up in medicine with
where highd dose chemotherapy and
radiation was what was given and then
when you got sick like that it didn't
mean you were getting better it just
meant it was
toxic so we had a whole new thing um
that we're involved in now which is
these new kinds of immunotherapies
that's called an On Target effect
when um you know the treatment is
actually causing side effects but it's
because you're getting better and you
know so completely different than
chemotherapy where it doesn't help so
that now you know we actually you have
to tell the patients about the
difference between those and um they
accept that it's a lot harder to have
your hair fall out and vomit from
chemotherapy and it's not helping you
get better so now I mean actually I've
seen patients start smiling when they
get the
fever um so and I want to tell you you
know I think s could give you an update
he's made a whole new kind of therapy
but you know the other main kind of
leukemia one is B cell leukemia and
that's that's that's what Emily had but
the other is called myoid
leukemia and Sid has invented a really
interesting uh new generation of therapy
for that maybe you could give us an
update yeah so um uh that's in my other
life
uh U but in my other life actually uh uh
still think about medicine um but uh uh
the idea there was so um it with with B
cell
leukemias um uh which like the ones that
Emily had um you get a little bit of an
evolutionary trick um and The
evolutionary trick is and very few
people know this it turns out that for
reasons that we don't fully understand
we understand somewhat you human beings
can live without B cells um uh we may
have to give them medicines B cells make
antibodies or precursors that make
antibodies and you can actually give
people anti antibodies by infusion um so
um in fact um one thing that you might
know it's interesting side again a side
note um is that that's partly the reason
that babies um get their antibodies from
their mothers usually um because there's
a passive transfer of antibodies until
their own immune systems can get
activated and and start working um so so
you can live without B cells um and
that's a that's a peculiarity
evolutionary peculiarity that human
beings have so therefore when you kill a
leukemia B cell leukemia you end up
typically uh at least temporarily also
killing B cells and that is by a
miraculous chance compatible with Life
otherwise someone like Emily you could
never treat because you would kill her B
cell leukemia the malignant or cancerous
B cells but you'd also end up killing
her normal B cells and that would be if
it if that was incompatible with with
life then she we won't be able to she
wouldn't be able to live now the other
kind of leukemia has uh unfortunately B
Be deviled us for a very long time and
because it it's not a B cell leukemia
it's a leukemia of a different part of
the blood uh called myoid cells so myoid
leukemias are deadly um there are people
often say you know how deadly you know
pancreatic cancer is and so forth myo
leukemia is about as deadly in in
certain genetic forms about as deadly if
not more deadly than any other cancer
you'd ever encounter um and for the
longest time we didn't know what to do
about it and that was my challenge I
work in the myoid world just like Carl
Works to some extent in the lymphoid
world the B cell t- cell world so um I
um had this idea and I'll tell you the
the origin it's the origin story is kind
of a fun story I was in Mexico uh with
my daughters
um and I was making these uh drawings um
and I and some of you might have ever
made the nice thing on Mexico when we go
there is that this house is so far away
from anywhere is that you don't have any
Internet um and I would encourage you if
you ever want to have a good idea in
life you should go to a place that has
no internet uh Because the Internet is
is the poison of all good ideas um so
anyway so there I was sitting there
without an internet feeling very
frustrated uh at first and so I said you
know what should I do I let's I'll sit
down with my kids and do Doodles or do
drawings with them and we started doing
these inverted drawings so you take a
instead of doing a uh you know Black
Pencil on a white uh sheet you drw a
white pencil on a black sheet and so
forth so just for fun and then I began
to think God you know um while I was
doodling along and my daughters were
doodling and they were drawing Mickey
Mouse cartoons and um and birds and the
ocean um I was drawing pictures of these
myoid cells um and um the the problem
with the myoid cells is that you can't
live without them they're not like B
cells if you kill the myoid leukemia you
also kill the myoid cells and then
you're stuck the person it's not
compatible with Life um you can't live
without them they are the cells that
form your blood red blood they form your
platelets the the the stuff that keeps
you alive
um and I thought well wait a second what
if we so so all our attention those thus
far had been focused on killing the
cancer cell um the the abnormal maligant
myoid cell and while I was making these
inverted drawings I said wait a second
what if we did the opposite and instead
of focusing first on killing the
abnormal or malignant myoid cell what if
we first first K made the normal myoid
cells somehow resistant or immune to a
certain kind of therapy so in other
words um you know uh it's almost like
saying think about the world differently
instead of um I'm not going to I'm going
to pick up some random person in the
audience instead of uh focusing our
attention on that gentleman over there
who um uh we want to get rid of I'm
sorry we don't really want to get rid of
you um but we want to get rid of um what
if we made and so the only the all our
attention would be how can we make how
how can we identify that gentleman he's
wearing a blue shirt I'm sorry um I'm
sorry to make an example of you but um
um he's wearing a blue shirt I I can say
I'll say everyone who's wearing a blue
shirt is now going to be targeted um in
this audience okay um I said well what
if we do did the opposite what if you
said what if you said everyone in this
audience stand up on your in your seats
and now put a white shirt on okay and
then all of a sudden by just by virtue
of doing that uh the malignant cell
would become uh visible um and there are
genetic ways you can do this I'm not
going to go into the depths of the
technology but it's an inverted way of
looking at the universe instead of
targeting the cancer cell you basically
convert the bone marrow into an immune
environment or a resistance environment
and you can do that there are
complicated genetic mechanisms by which
you can do that and once you do that all
of a sudden the cancer cell stands out
like a sore thumb or like this gentleman
would would wearing his I'm sorry again
but uh wearing his blue shirt um and so
um that's what we've been done and we've
done this now it sounds crazy uh but we
can do this in humans we've now done
this in about 12 humans and lo and
behold bizar enough you can actually do
this in humans you have all these
Technologies a suite of technologies
that allow us to now convert these cells
into uh different kinds of cells the
normal cells thereby making the cancer
stick out like a sore thrum and now once
it sticks out like a sore thumb we're
deploying the next generation of
therapies so that now we can kill the
sore thumb remove the sore thumb
whatever it might be so that's a
completely new Direction um and I hope
that Tri all successful and that's we
there's a
there are multiple iterations of it um
and one iteration of course uses
technology that Carl and his colleagues
have developed cares again but this time
directed not against B cells but against
myoid cells so sorry about the very long
explanation but I thought I would paint
a vision of of what happens when you
don't have the
internet so um well hope for a power
outage but
um you know the cell that that's
outlined in this book here you know the
principles are shown is that I mean one
cell can turn into two and two to four
and you can do the
math um and a car t- cell begins with
one t- cell from the patient which is
what happened in Emily and they it
became literally billions but the same
thing happens when the cell goes Rogue
and becomes a cancer cell one cell to
and it becomes billions and that's what
what we have as a battle um and we'll
come back to how that can happen but I
wanted to ask you know since Emily's
been treated there's now been about
20,000 people treated with carti cells
and um the real problem has been the
cost
um and it cost about you know
$400,000 to you know from a commercial
perspective to make car T cells now
although the chemotherapy and all that
actually cost more if you add it up in
patients who get boneal transplants so
so that's a problem right now is it cost
a lot and I wonder um if you can talks
it about the efforts you're doing to try
to democratize this yeah so another
effort aside from the myo leukemia
another effort that I launched is um to
make these tea cells in India um and
when when they're made in India
generally speaking they're made for the
rest of the world because um India is
the largest site for um the manufacturer
of all generic medicines typically
inexpensive medicines if you go to
Mexico and you are on herp and that her
and probably came from India if you are
in Venezuela or South Africa and you get
some other medicine again um uh within
affordability that probably came from
India so I thought to myself why don't
we try to make um T cells um in India
carti cells in India um I'm the master
of Impractical ideas by the way um if
you have an impractical idea just come
to me afterwards I'm I'll I'll take it
all in if so I'm being the master in
Practical idea that said well let's just
try to do it and let's see what happens
and I got I don't know how I roped you
in I got K roped Carl in um and said
Carl listen and and it was mostly a cold
call if I remember correctly I said Carl
listen you I really want to make these
um genetically modified te- cells in
India and offer them for um one0 maybe
even 12th the price um and everyone
thought it was crazy um
and uh I should tell you that that was
four years ago and just last month we
treated our 25th patient um and very
successfully
um and uh we forced Carl to come maybe
twice um um and we are now making the
the the the toughest there would be very
tough steps by the way here um you have
to create basically a vault which you
made here in at pen uh one of the best
in its Best in Class best in the world
um you have to create a vault where all
of this is manufactured where one single
droplet of an infections of an infection
will completely close down the facility
um and it has to be cleaned with a
basically with a toothbrush um from
beginning to end so that's how clean
that facility has to be um and then a
separate from making that Vault um uh
and training people to get into that
Vault and operate and you know they have
to wear suits and so forth separate from
making that um you have to make the um
the gene delivery system so in other
words these are these te- cells are
weaponized to kill cancer they have to
be weaponized they have to give them the
weapon that weapon is delivered through
gene therapy and that gene therapy
happens to be a virus u a special kind
of virus virus not the kind of virus
that will infect all people these are
viruses that have been um purposefully
inactivated in order to make them uh
inactive viruses they can deliver a gene
but they can never go on and infect
other cells they can only go one way um
so so you have to create a facility to
make that
virus um and also last month in India we
made a facility to make the virus so for
the first time um and so it was a it was
a it was a double um double whammy there
were two trains that were coming at us
number one is how do we make the virus
the virus itself is very difficult to
make we've now achieved the virus um and
how do we make the cells in this Vault
like facility we've made the Vault like
facility and now putting those two
pieces together um now we're we're
making the cells we've treated 25
patient the last piece of this uh in
order to be full fully democratized or
fully uh uh
accessible is um is to to Really um U
make it you know with systems which
don't rely on very high consumable
prices um and so that that's one that's
a third piece that's the third train um
so we're now making those two um so um
one mad idea leads to another so now
I've gone to Bangalore and commissioned
someone to make me all the tubing and
the piping and the you know all the
Machinery that allows us to do this um
and um and as I said we've treated 25
patients and these are mostly young kids
and they and this is an important word
to use they are cured um so there and
obviously uh inspired by Emily there's a
picture of Emily in that in the facility
uh we always think about her and your
group um and in fact as we speak someone
from Penn is is in in in in India in
Bangalore Bruce lven your colleague is
in is in in is in India sort of um
looking at our facility giving us advice
about how to move things along but um it
was an incredibly generous thing for for
your City to spare um uh people so that
they could make a difference around the
world and thank you for doing that well
thank you for doing it so I mean I can
tell you we have about 5,000 cases a
year of you know pediatric leukemia like
Emily had and I was told there were
60,000 a year in uh in India and they
just didn't get treated so this is huge
what it's done um and it reminds me of
what you know so they really to do the
kind of chemotherapy and therapy of uh
childhood leukemia that we did you know
carti cells are one time thing one and
done you infuse it and it's over uh and
you can go home but um for child what we
used to do took three years uh so when a
child was diagnosed it was three years
of chemotherapy often radiation so
that's awful from the patients
perspective childhood growing up Etc but
also you can't do that in India the
logistics just didn't happen so those
60,000 kids mostly died whereas in the
US most of them lived it just it was
horrible side effects so this is doing
them basically it's like what happened
in Africa where advances in technology
they never had landline phones in
stringing Tel they went straight to cell
phones and that's what says making
happen uh you know there in India and
hopefully in the rest of
other yeah I should tell you our roster
for um we have a u i mean as you you
know we have to go through trials like
any other it's very regulated um as I
said there's almost a there's a an
internal monthly inspection so an
internal monthly audit but there's also
random audits that are made for a Cell
Therapy facility we're talking about
cells so Cell Therapy
facility and um uh the we also have
separately a an open Line uh which
allows you from anywhere outside the
United States to call in and ask for
potential treatment and if this is now
we've extended actually this week we
will begin our trial for multiple Myoma
uh another deadly cancer um this is an
adult cancer um but so we have now
lymphoma Myoma and Leukemia covered um
and then now we're beginning some gene
therapy studies all of which can be done
in that cell therapy unit but um we put
a human being at the end of a line to
pick up the phone if you um were um
asking uh to be treated uh and to be put
in a a a list for the trial um the
person gave up after one day uh they
said that they were not only that was
the job so taxing because the phone rang
every second um but also it was horrific
because it was children from you can
imagine children from Pakistan from
Bangladesh from you know these places
are the most populous places in the
world calling every second saying you
know how can I get get get on this um
get on the next study list etc etc so
finally we've automated it um we have
right now a lottery system which is not
great uh things being tough um but
eventually hopefully you know we will um
at some point of time um we want to
return the favor that your city and um
your unit has uh given to the world we
want to return the favor because like
you said when you start off with
sometimes when you start off with bad
bad technology and you get really new
good technology you can go over oops
sorry uh you can go over um and and you
know we could at some point of time I in
my imagination I could think of of a
time in which we would say why why give
kids 3 years of chemo um that will cause
growth stunting and cognitive
retardation and you know PTSD and
psychiatric problems for three full
years imagine being strung up to the
hospital why give when you can give two
shots maybe one shot um and be done uh
um and if that trial proves to be true
um then we will return the favor and
tell you that it's true and you can then
figure out how to pressurize um big
Pharma companies to make it
cheaper yes I I'll hand you a hot
potato yeah so that's clearly a big
Society issue facing us is how how to
democon eyesee the technology I can tell
you both here in Philadelphia and and in
bangladore Bangladesh and in all
throughout India the whole Co epidemic
made this really difficult and slowed us
down yes I mean yeah and once again back
to back to Philadelphia hope you know
with the help of uh your two recent Noel
laurates uh we were able to get through
most of that uh epidemic without the
horrendous Casualty that could have
happened if he didn't have had a vaccine
so yeah so you know I want to go back to
the beginning of your book or one of the
stories which I found
most
um interesting really which which is a
history of discovering how genes begin
to work and I wonder if you can tell us
about Gregor mendle yes um um so Mel's a
part of this book but of course the gene
leads up to the cell um and so Mel was
um was a monk uh he was a Moravian monk
um and um I'll tell you a story about
mle but let me just tell you a story
about about going to see mle um I uh
it's mendal lived in a mon Monastery in
the city of
Bruno um and uh it's not easy to get to
Brena um it's not terribly difficult but
you have to change two trains land in
Vienna change trains etc etc etc um and
the monastery where I wanted to visit um
it has no simple mechanism of
communication so you can't write up
front and say I'm coming you know can I
go and see mle's house so I land up
after this exhausting trip uh all the
way um and the woman in the monastery
who's sitting at the front Des says oh
I'm sorry we're
closed um and it's a weekday um and it's
closed because of some God knows what
reason so I said um how do I you know
how does one to I wouldn't know you know
there have no simple mechanism and I've
come here from all this far away just to
see the room that Gregor mle worked in
um and she said well you have to present
um an application in
triplicate um so I said now that I'm
from India I can solve that problem I
said I I hereby present an application
in triplicate and she looked at me she
said said um okay so I filled out three
forms identically uh with my name I
filled them out in front of her while
she watched very angrily um and then I
presented her with three forms and I
said here is the application in
triplicate and she was very annoyed and
then she let me in um anyway so that's
how I got into Gregor mle's room now
Gregor mle was a monk um and what mle
discovered was very interesting what
mental discovered was that and he had no
idea he was breeding peas um and uh what
he discovered was that over time um when
he counted all these seven different uh
uh in characteristics of peas uh traits
um he found that they um would travel
across Generations as if they were
intact so before mendal the most logical
thing to believe and sounds more much
more reasonable um was that the way that
we inherit characteristics from our
parents is that the characteristics get
put into some kind of biological blender
um and they get Blended around um and
thereby and you get some mixture um of
traits from one parent and the other um
what mle discovered is that that's not
true um that there is no such blender
that in fact the traits themselves are
coded he didn't know any of this before
he didn't know code he he didn't know
but what he discovered was that the
traits move across Generations
intact um and that led to the idea many
years later he didn't even Co the word
but years and years later um about 45
years later so for 45 years basically no
one read mle's paper um so if you've
ever written a paper that no one's ever
read um you can rest assured that maybe
in 45 years someone's actually going to
might read it and and be inspired but
anyway uh so no one read medal's paper
but about 40 odd years later people
suddenly began to realize that that's
how the the The Inheritance parents are
U work and it took yet another 40 to 50
odd years before um scientists figured
out that it was DNA that carried that
message and yet another you know several
years decades to figure out how it
carried the message and ultimately how
that message gets transmitted to your
Offspring now just to bring up the story
fully um the cell has a parallel history
so um for the longest time people
thought that you know we were made up we
were slabs of meat um and it was
continuous um and that you know flesh
generated flesh no one knew exactly how
but flesh generated flesh one very
common theory was a theory called the
homunculus that you know human beings
were born fully formed and then we sort
of got blown up like a balloon gets
blown up uh
over time um but cell theory is very
analogous in some ways that all of a
sudden you realize that that the world
in the case of inheritance is the word
used in this book is atomistic in the
sense it's all divided up it's not one
single spool it's all divided up and
it's in the case of genes genes uh
divided up um and similarly in in the
cellular world you realize that we
aren't slabs of meat um we aren't slabs
of Flesh it's not continuous it comes
from one cell one cell becomes two cells
etc etc and if you were to looked down a
microscope in through the human body
then of course you'd realize that we
were not made up of continuous slabs of
meat but in fact we're made up of
individual cells um your skin has uh
billions of individual cells your brain
has billions of individual cells and so
forth so so um so there's a there's a
there's a there's a kind of a deep
analogy I would say
between these ideas um and um and it
leads to a set of I think very
interesting philosophical questions
which is why is it that matter is
organized atomistically atoms um cells
bodies are organized atomist
atomistically information is organized
atomistically um in genes information
for the computer is organized
atomistically in bits and btes
um and you know what the advantages of
that system are so um it's a very
interesting philosophical question that
that why these atomistic ideas um become
so powerful one obvious answer is that
you can you can build with building
blocks uh much more easily than you can
build without building blocks it's much
more difficult to take as I said a whole
homunculus and blow it up but maybe
there's some other reason that we don't
fully understand s yet um I'm reminded
of this um important moment because it's
philosophically important moment because
in the world of
computers um we are beginning to build
um although we haven't succeeded yet but
we're beginning to build non atomistic
computers so people have heard about
Quantum Computing a little bit so
Quantum Computing uh or Quantum
Computing in general does not rely on
bits and bytes uh it it relies on other
systems I'm not going to go into all the
details um in the world of cells it'd be
an interesting philosophical question
and in the world of genes be interesting
philosophical question to figure out how
we could move away from these atomistic
ideas um into something more
probabilistic than less atomistic and
and what that would do but um I'll leave
that kind of as an open and I don't know
the answer but I I love these kinds of
um puzzles cuz what would be what would
we start looking like if we started
having let's say some kind of hybrid
cell um we've actually started making
some uh We've made a a completely new a
Neo cell um a cell that's never been
found not not found in nature you you
I've discussed this before um in fact we
put them into human beings um uh to
treat cancer but and um and so far
they've lived they live as neoc cells
Neo completely neoc cells of course A C
cell is a something
yourself so you know I think we have
time just for one more question and then
we're going to have uh you know uh time
for audience question and answer so um
you know I wonder if you might talk
about you know this the new aspect now
cells of of um you know we when I was in
medical school and would said you know
we were taught cells not at the same
time yeah but close but anyway but that
cells progressively differentiate and
the age and that you can't reverse time
um and there's been a revolution now
where of now making stem cells out of
mature cells and I wonder if you might
describe a little bit about plur poent
stem cells sure um it people thought
that this was complete Madness um and
again this was one of these completely
impractical improbable ideas um taken up
by a Japanese scientist shya yamanaka
who also won the Nobel Prize um several
years ago but yamanaka launched this um
there were there were sort of very vague
hints um from various people that this
could be done that you had to you could
take a cell and reverse its time in
terms of Aging so you could take a
mature cell and make it a plor poent
cell and by a plor poent cell it means
that that cell can give rise to so you
take a skin cell which is completely
committed it is completely fixed to
being a skin cell and you can take that
skin cell and reverse time and make it
into a cell that can become skin and
cartilage and Bone and neurons and all
of these other kinds of cells in fact in
principle we know in animals it can
become a full animal um so you've
converted a fully mature cell into a
cell that's has all these capabilities
um there were some hints that it could
be done uh work that had been done
earlier suggested that there were there
was a possibility that that you could do
this um and um
yamanaka um did this improbable thing is
that he he imagined that there were a
combination of genes that would be able
to do this he knew that unlikely be one
Gene and so he began to test
combinations but in hundreds of com
hundreds thousands tens of thousands of
combinations of genes cuz not not one
would do so imagine that you have you
know 10 genes in one column 10 genes in
the second column 10 genes in the third
and 10 already now you can you can
imagine that you have you know more than
100,000 combinations that you can
possibly or permutations that you can
possibly have of those of picking from
column 1 2 3 and four um but he did this
and eventually found four um and now you
know there's some chemicals that can
even replace some of them so we're
entering an era where you could take um
a skin cell um and I know you've been
working on this yourself uh you can take
a skin cell or some other cell some
mature cell and make it into a tea cell
and then make that T Cell into a car T
Cell so you can essentially create an
immune system or part of an immune
system out of a skin cell and you no
longer have to wait for um you know
those cells to become what they become
you can in fact grow these cells and put
them in a bank and if you would were to
ever need C cells or te- cells you could
grow them up and they would become
cartis cells and te- cells so an
incredible Revolution we come to that
towards the end of the book but um but
that's the that's the incredible
capacity that that um that and very very
surprising certainly no want to imagine
that any of that could be done yeah
completely true I mean you know first
cell therapies were things like blood
transfusion um which came out in World
War II just and that I mean saved many
lives just to be a type blood but now
what you just heard from Sid is a
revolution that if you can make and
regenerate different kinds of cells
that's the future we have coming forward
I think with Cell Therapy yeah let me
just before we end up with the audience
let just going to just put one last
thought in in people's uh brains which I
think is is is very important um is that
we're sitting on top of three
revolutions and may not occur to you
scientifically it may not occur to you
but these are generational changing
revolutions and we're seeing them right
now you know the problem is when you
look at things so close up they don't
seem as if they're so such a big change
um number one is artificial intelligence
um uh the the stuff that you see about
artificial intelligence you know the
kind of chat gbd stuff that's just
nothing that's tily winks compared to
the the real depth of things you can do
make new kinds of medicines make new
kinds of materials make new kinds of
various things um we can talk about the
problems um uh which the existential
threats that that causes as well happy
to answer that question number two is um
a cellular Revolution so we're now
making new kinds of cells we can Bank
them um we can uh via the cellular
Revolution we can make we can basically
absorb the benefits of the genetic
Revolution so they're sort of two things
combining together so to give one
example IVF is an example of cell of the
cellular Revolution So Close by that we
don't think of it that way but of course
it is it's a it's a cellular product uh
human beings are cellular products and
the third one of course is we're sort of
in the middle of is the information
revolution so um what's most interesting
and I'll leave this as a last sort of
thought question is when these three
things come together um and the both the
benefits and the existential threats
that that can bring and I think that is
an interesting note to end on because
you know you can go home and stay awake
all night thinking about about what what
will happen when these two things come
together well thank you very much thank
you
s I just want to thank both of you for
your contributions as well as coming out
here tonight thank you so much um the
question I have for you guys is uh
relative to the last topic that you were
talking about about um cells um I I've I
think everybody has heard about the
henria LAX cells um and you were talking
about age the cells age um but hers
don't seem to is there does is there
some type of uh explanation for that
well cancer cells the hers are cancer
cells so they were they were cells taken
from um Henrietta LAX um uh cancer canc
cancer cells seem to defy the standard
processes of Aging even cancer cells age
um and cancer cells die the problem is
that they is that they
reproduce um and those it's not that
again remember that cancer cells also
die
like like normal cells die the problem
is that they reproduce so much that the
death is never ever completely dep of
that cell or that cell lineage is never
completed so they keep reproducing and
reproducing a normal cell will have a
finite number of reproductions before it
becomes tired and says I'm done I'm
becoming a um you know I'm either dying
or I'm going to become a mature cell and
sit tight for instance in your brain for
a long time period of time that's the
normal process and there's a mechanism
by which that happens um and over time
the the genetic programs of a of a cell
gets locked and more and more locked and
more and more locked ultimately leading
to a normal cell becoming either dead or
uh becoming a mature cell and sitting
tight in cancer that does not happen and
that's what doesn't happen in henrix
cells so people often say cancer cells
are Immortal they're not Immortal in the
sense that they in the sense that you
might understand it colloquially they
also die the problem is that they don't
have a program
to stop
reproducing um so that's the fundamental
difference it's not cell death although
there's some cancers that involve cell
death a few but it's not the question of
cell death it's or a lack of cell death
cancer cells die very much the problem
with cancer cell is is the the capacity
to not be able to stop reproducing and
not be able to reach that state in which
they get locked and say I'm
done yeah the um to just say a little
bit more about that
um uh normal cells have a clock in them
and they count every time they divide
and actually DNA shortens the end of the
DNA the Tails is one way of knowing how
many times the cell is divided and and
that's
been worked out in human terms to really
last us a LIF span but not we couldn't
go and have another one of us be cloned
without lengthening your DNA the ends of
that again and Leonard haick here in in
Philadelphia described that called the
hylick phenomena that you can only
divide so many times unless you get
immortalized and that's what happened
Henry had a LAX cancer cells they could
always
reproduce you talking about neoc cells
um what is a neocell exactly I mean how
how is it different
from you know the cells in your body
it's you said it's made made in a lab um
and okay so so why did you do it what's
the function and does it does it work
does it work like your your all your
cells it divides it has the same
chemistry it has the same cell bodies
and you know mechanisms and whatnot so
um there many there many different ways
you can approach making a neocell um I
I'm we're using them we're using a very
primitive uh or I would say the first
generation of the
so what we're creating is we're taking
cells and making them have hybrid
properties and why did we do that we did
that because for solid tumors um these
uh can lung cancer breast cancer Etc
these C cells which seem so effective in
blood cancers don't seem to work very
well in solid cancers um and we really
fully don't understand why Carl's
described a few of the phenomenon why
but U we don't fully understand exactly
why one of the most horrific images that
I've ever seen and Carl's published on
this is you take a solid tumor in an
animal model or even in a human and you
take C T cells and you'll see the te-
cells form a ring around the the solid
tumor but they can't get in and whether
that's we know some some reasons why
it's a physical barrier it's a chemical
barrier there there are there are active
factors that the tumors is secreting to
prevent tea cells from getting in but
that's what the problem is so but there
is another cell uh that actually gets in
very well um and it's a myoid cell we
back to my favorite myoid cell um these
are cells that are professionals that
their job is to scout um so right now in
your body these cells are Scouting
Around um looking for um looking for
pathogens and making sure that they
don't that you don't have pathogens and
they can get into tumors very well um so
the reason we made them we said well
what if we take a myoid cell and we we
convert it into uh and give it the
apparatus of a t- cell so we mix we
create a hybrid cell which is half a
myoid cell and then half a t- cell so
that it would go into a tumor and then
kill like a t- cell will kill so that
was a reason behind this as we've
treated some patients and we're waiting
for some data to figure out whether it
works or doesn't work but at least it
gets in and stays but that's just the
Primitive as I said that's step one um
you can do much more complicated things
there are people who are working on
synthetic biology much more deeply than
this uh this would be one example of
synthetic biology but people there there
are people who are making cells um by
taking um a cell uh hollowing it out in
terms of pulling out all its genetic
material and replacing it with uh a new
genetic code a new genetic material that
is also a new cell what we haven't been
able to do so far and by the way that
cell reproduces es reproduces its
genetic material and behaves like a
normal cell what we haven't been able to
do so far which would be wonderful to do
at some point of time because it give us
enormous power is to build a complete
cell from scratch that we have not been
able to do that would involve building
each of the organel the anatomy the
parts of a cellular Anatomy from scratch
I suspect we'll be able to do it at some
point of time um but it would involve
building mitochondria from scratch it
would involve building the you know the
various cell parts of the cell body the
nucleus from scratch etc etc that we
have not been able to do no one's been
able to do so yeah a put a little
context um we right now just have this
year the 50th anniversary of where
recombinant biology and molecular
biology started where you could actually
take the part of a gene take it out of
one say a bacteria put it in a virus and
the other way around change it cells
that's what Sid's talking about so 50
years ago the very first
ability to do that happened and so you
can make new kinds of cells um we
learned about
during Co the so-called gain of function
research you know where you heard a lot
of talk about people intentionally
engineering viruses to be either more
virulent or not I mean we've used
viruses that have been the pathogenicity
has been taken out of them so they could
be used as a tool but you can have a
form of biologic Warfare where you use
the same technology to make you know
worse agents either viruses or bacteria
so there's an issue here on uh ethics um
and how you control science this way
that you know which is something that we
need to have harmonization on between
different countries and and that that
has evolved now because these tools are
become literally sometimes high school
students can do this in their
garage as somebody who's a practitioner
and very familiar with impractical ideas
I want to thank you on all our behalf
that you pure and practical ideas have
become so practical and so life
affirming and I have a question that has
nothing to do with
cells I was an English
major I'm interested in if you wouldn't
mind telling us a little bit about your
growing up in India and when as a child
or as a young adult or a young man you
started to have thoughts like this and a
little bit about your
family
um so I I grew up uh in India and I I
came quite quickly to um uh uh
University at uh at at Stanford um I um
uh what one thing that people don't know
about me is
for my entire childhood I thought I
would be a
musician um and I learned music very
very very U deeply uh um and very few
people know about this but um so that
was what I was going to do um and I I
think and if I may answer your question
a little bit metaphorically I think um
it is not a coincidence that a lot of
scientists are musicians um and in
general it's not a coincidence there a
lot of mathematicians a lot of
biologists lot of actually the a vast
number of creative people if they don't
Know music they'll at least understand
why music is important um and I'll tell
you why I think um because it allows you
and it asks you music allows you asks
you to make something out of nothing um
so you take sound which you and I are
making right now and all of a sudden
you're asked to say take that sound and
make something completely different out
of it um and and especially uh if you're
interested in jazz or composition to it
doesn't matter you're asked to make
something completely different out of
something something else so I a lot of
what I do and again I don't speak very
publicly about it but a lot of what I do
I think goes back to that I that idea so
I went to Stanford and the first thing I
discovered is I went and started working
I was you know I was interested in music
still but I thought you know let me I'll
sort of V vely interested in biology I
was good at science um and so I went to
work for Paul Berg U at Paul Berg's lab
and Paul Berg happened to be the person
who had invented recombinant DNA so so
this was what you could do you could
still do you can go to pen and say I'm
going to go work for Carl Jun sorry I'm
just recruiting people to your
laboratory but anyway um so you can do
things like this um and so I went to
work for Paul's Lab at Paul's lab and I
got two things out of this number one is
I learned that just like in music you
can make something out of nothing uh or
something out of something else you can
do that in science um Paul by the way
loved music was very interested in music
and the second thing is that Paul once
he had made this incredible discovery
that you can take two pieces of genes
and make a Neo Gene a completely new
genetic material he had organized uh the
the most important ethics conference in
the history of biology called the asamar
conference
um and so from him I also learned the
fact that along with Biology you also
have to have training or some kind of
idea of the effects that you're
producing in the world and the way to do
that is to engage with the world through
ethical dialogue the books or whatever
it might be so that that dialogue
doesn't get interrupted you you're not
sort of this uh person in a white coat
um but in fact are having engagement
with the world so I hope that's some
answer to your lovely question hi um my
quick question is um you mentioned some
of the Revolutions in medicine and one
of them is AI and I was wondering if um
any of your therapies that you're
working on incorporate AI or anything
like of that nature um so the quick
answer is yes
um um uh so I've started some new work
um another totally impractical idea but
the Impractical idea was I was talking
just talking to car about it beforehand
is I thought to myself if we can do all
of this fun stuff with AI why can't we
use AI to make medicines um because uh
AI can test all of that so um and in
fact why can't we use AI to make the
beginnings of a ctis cell so the new
thing that I'm doing right now I I was
showing Carl my my latest pictures I I
send them to Carl occas they like baby
pictures but um but we've just begun to
design um the the the beginnings of a
ctis cell based on AI Alone um and that
will I think be something that's um
really going to be super interesting for
me um maybe it'll never work out
completely impractical idea but
something to look forward to thank you
very
[Applause]
much